----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

The 

MACHINE 
LEARNING 
Primer 

    a SAS Best Practices e-book 

      by Kimberly Nevala 

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

Table of Contents 

1.  Machine Learning Defined ................................................... 3 

      •  Do  Machines  Learn? ........................................................................................... 5 

      •  Problems t hat Lend Themselves to Machine Learning ................................. 8 

2. The Basic Techniques ............................................................ 13 

      •  The 4 Types of Learning .................................................................................... 14 

      •  Hot Topics ........................................................................................................... 19 

3. Points to Ponder .....................................................................22 

4. Best Practices ..........................................................................29 

5. Are You Ready for Machine Learning? (A Checklist) .......47 

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

  1 
      Machine Learning Defined 

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

machine \mə-ˈshēn\ a mechanically, electrically, or electronically  

operated device for performing a task. 

learning \ˈlərniNG\  the activity or process of gaining knowledge or skill  

by studying, practicing, being taught, or experiencing something. 

                                  A Machine Learning Primer:  Machine Learning Defined        4 

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

Do                                    Yes! Machines learn by studying data to detect patterns or by applying known  

                                      rules to: 
Machines 
                                           •    Categorize or catalog like people or things 
Learn? 
                                           •    Predict likely outcomes or actions based on identified patterns 

                                           •    Identify hitherto unknown patterns and relationships 

                                           •    Detect anomalous or unexpected behaviors  

                                      The processes machines use to learn are known as algorithms. Different algo- 

                                      rithms learn in different ways.  As new data regarding observed responses or  

                                      changes to the environment are provided to the “machine” the algorithm’s  

                                      performance improves. Thereby resulting in increasing “intelligence” over  

                                      time. 

                                                     A Machine Learning Primer:  Machine Learning Defined                   55 

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

But...   
                                     With the advent of big data, both the amount of data available and our ability  
Are Machines                         to process it has increased exponentially. The ability of machines to learn  
Creative?                            and thus appear ever more intelligent has increased proportionally. Even so,  
                                     machines aren’t independent thinkers (yet). 

Or                                   Yes, machine learning may identify previously unidentified opportunities or  
Independently                        problems to be solved. But the machine is not autonomously creative. The  

                                     machine will not spontaneously develop new hypotheses from facts (data)  

Intelligent?                         not in evidence. Nor can the machine determine a new way to respond to  

                                     emerging stimuli.  

                                     Remember: the output of a machine learning algorithm is entirely dependent  

                                     on the data it is exposed to. Change the data, change the result. 

                                                  A Machine Learning Primer:  Machine Learning Defined             6 

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

                          Personalized Marketing 

CASE IN POINT 

        Companies are better than ever at understanding why customers buy their products, use their  

        services, or engage their expertise. We can point the “machine” at a lake of consumer data to detect  

        patterns and preferred channels for consumption. It can use historical and real-time data to deter- 

        mine that I, a frequent business traveler and coffee addict, may welcome a real-time message that my  

        favorite coffee shop is around the corner. My dad would not welcome this interaction. He brews his  

        coffee at home and will respond to a coupon in the mail. Which can also include incentives for other  

        items he might buy on his next grocery outing.  

        The machine is optimizing activities for each customer across known channels (digital, paper, brick  

        and mortar). It won’t, however, independently create a new interaction channel that doesn’t already  

        exist.   

                                                            A Machine Learning Primer:  Machine Learning Defined                        7 

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

Problems                             In simple terms, machine learning is particularly suited to problems where:  
That Lend                                 •    Applicable associations or rules might be intuited, but are not easily  

                                              codified or described by simple logical rules.  

Themselves  
                                          •    Potential outputs or actions are defined but which action to take  

to Machine                                    is dependent on diverse conditions which cannot be predicted or  

                                              uniquely identified before an event happens.  

Learning                                  •    Accuracy is more important than interpretation or interpretability.  

                                          •    The data is problematic for traditional analytic techniques. Specif- 

                                              ically, wide data (data sets with a large number of data points or  

                                              attributes in every record compared to the number of records) and  

                                              highly correlated data (data with similar or closely related values) can  

                                              present problems for traditional analytic methods. 

                                                   A Machine Learning Primer:  Machine Learning Defined                8 

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

                        Identifying People and Things In Pictures  

CASE IN POINT 

       A practiced machine learning algorithm could recognize the face of a known “person of interest” in a  

       crowded airport scene, thereby preventing the person from boarding a flight—or worse. 

       Social media platforms utilize machine learning to automatically tag people and identify common  

       objects such as landmarks in uploaded photos.  

       Why Is This a Machine Learning Problem?  

       Image data is complicated. The number of pixels in each image make the data set wider than it is  

       deep. Pixels close to one another have similar values making the data highly correlated. Images of the  

       same subject have multiple subtle (and not-so-subtle) variations.  

       Of course, you can easily recognize people known to you - and those that aren’t – in pictures; even  

       when they have different expressions, poses or clothes. You can also identify “like” items both concep- 

       tually (i.e., animal, mineral or vegetable) and concretely (i.e., dog, cat, fish). But can you translate that  

       knowledge into simple steps and discrete rules for how you made the match?  

                                                       A Machine Learning Primer:  Machine Learning Defined                  9 

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

                         Genomics 

CASE IN POINT 

       Machine learning can help discover what genes are involved in specific disease pathways.  

       Machine learning can also be used to determine which treatments will be most effective for an indi- 

       vidual patient based on their genetic makeup, demographic and psychographic characteristics.  

       Why Is This a Machine Learning Problem?  

       Genomic data is wide: every person has more than 20,000 genes. As a result, the number of genes  

       (data points) in an individual record is always larger than the number of people (records) in any data  

       set.  

       A number of factors add to the complexity. Including, but not limited to: the high degree of varia- 

       tion within each of those 20,000+ genes. The fact that your relatives have similar genomes (making  

       them highly correlated). That relatively few individuals may suffer from a given disease making the  
       data pool extremely shallow. Last but not least, genes in isolation may not predict health outcomes or  

       disease expression. Biochemical, environmental and other factors must also be considered, thereby  

       requiring integrated data from multiple, diverse sources.     

                                                          A Machine Learning Primer:  Machine Learning Defined                     10 

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

                       Navigation and the Self-Driving Car 

CASE IN POINT 

       Machine learning can identify the best routes from point A to B, predict transit conditions and travel  

       time and predict the best route based on current, evolving road conditions. 

       Machine Learning can drive a car without requiring input from a driver.  

       Why Is This a Machine Learning Problem?  

       Driving is a complicated but well-bounded problem. There are, in fact, a limited number of actions  

       a vehicle may take: start, stop, go forward, go backward, turn, speed up and slow down. However,  

       the decision to take any of action is influenced by numerous factors including but not limited to road  

       conditions, weather conditions, presence and behavior of other vehicles, two-legged persons and  

       their four-legged friends, and the rules of the road – just to name a few. While a human driver instinc- 

       tually assesses all these inputs on the fly, capturing discrete rules for every possible combination is  

       impossible.  

                                                     A Machine Learning Primer:  Machine Learning Defined               11 

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

Common Applications 

                                  PROACTIVE MAINTENANCE 

                                                                   FRAUD DETECTION 

                                                                                    RESOURCE 

                                                                                      OPTIMIZATION 
 DETECT EARLY ONSET  

            OF INFECTION  

                 FACIAL 

                   RECOGNITION    SELF-DRIVING CARS 

                                                     HIGH VOLUME       PEOPLE LIKE  
              VIRTUAL ASSISTANTS 
                                                          TRADING            YOU... 

                                       A Machine Learning Primer:  Machine Learning Defined               12 

----------------------- Page 13-----------------------

  2 
         The Basic Techniques 

----------------------- Page 14-----------------------

The 4 Types of Machine Learning 

     Supervised         Semi-supervised 

                          Unsupervised          Reinforcement 

                              A Machine Learning Primer: The Basic Techniques 14 

----------------------- Page 15-----------------------

                                         In supervised learning the machine is taught by example. Examples of the  

     Supervised                          desired inputs and outputs are provided. The “machine” (aka the algorithm)  

                                         uses this input to determine correlations and logic that can be used to predict  

       Learning                          the answer. 

                                         This is like giving students an answer key and asking them to “show their  

                                         work.” In supervised learning, sample Q&A are provided. The machine fills in  

                                         how to get from A to B. Once the logical pattern is identified, it can be applied  

                                         to solve similar problems.  
Common Techniques 
  •  Bayesian Statistics                 Practical Applications 

  •  Decision Trees 

                                                                             PERSONALIZING  
  •  Forecasting                                                             INTERACTION 

  •  Neural Networks 

                                                                                                               FRAUD  
  •  Random Forests                                                                                            DETECTION 

                                                                    IMAGE , SPEECH AND TEXT  
                                                                              RECOGNITION 
  •  Regression Analysis 

  •   Support Vector   
    Machines [SVM]                        RISK                                                     CUSTOMER  
                                          ASSESSMENT                                          SEGMENTATION 

                                                             A Machine Learning Primer: The Basic Techniques                 15 

----------------------- Page 16-----------------------

                                          Semi-supervised learning is used to address similar problems as supervised  

Semi-Supervised                           learning. However, in semi-supervised learning the machine is provided some  

                                          data with the answer defined (aka labeled) along with additional data that  

        Learning                          is not labeled with the answer. In other words, the some of the input data is  

                                          tagged with desired output (answer) while the remainder is untagged.  

                                          Semi-supervised learning is used in cases where there is too much data or  

                                          subtle variations in the data to be able to provide a comprehensive set of  

                                          examples. In this case, the provided inputs and outputs provide the general  
 Common Techniques 
                                          pattern the machine can extrapolate and apply to the remaining data.  
   •    See Supervised   
      Learning                              Practical Applications  

                                                                                       SPEECH RECOGNITION 

                                                                IMAGE RECOGNITION/  
                                                                                                             WEB PAGE   
                                                                     CLASSIFICATION 
                                                                                                        CLASSIFICATION 

                                                              A Machine Learning Primer: The Basic Techniques                  16 

----------------------- Page 17-----------------------

                                          In unsupervised learning, the machine studies data to identify patterns. In  

   Unsupervised                           this case, there is no answer key. The machine determines correlations and  

                                          relationships by parsing the available data.  

        Learning                          Unsupervised learning is modeled on how we humans naturally observe  

                                          the world: drawing inferences and grouping like things based on uncon- 

                                          strained observation and intuition. As our experience grows (or in the case  

                                          of the machine – the amount of data it is exposed to grows) our intuition and  

                                          observations change and/or become more refined.  
Common Techniques 
  •  Affinity Analysis                    Practical Applications  

  •  Clustering 

  •  Clustering: K-Means 

  •   Nearest-Neighbor  
     Mapping                                                                           ANOMALY/INTRUSION  

                                                                                       DETECTION 

  •  Self-Organizing Maps                                                                               IDENTIFYING LIKE  
                                                                                                                 THINGS 

  •   Singular Value  
     Decomposition 
                                                                      MARKET BASKET  
                                                                            ANALYSIS 

                                                              A Machine Learning Primer: The Basic Techniques                   17 

----------------------- Page 18-----------------------

                                       In reinforcement learning the machine is provided a set of allowed actions,  

  Reinforcement                        rules and potential end states. In other words, the rules of the game are  

                                       defined. By applying the rules, exploring different actions and observing  
       Learning                        resulting reactions the machine learns to exploit the rules to create a desired  

                                       outcome.  Thus determining what series of actions, in what circumstances, will  

                                       lead to an optimal or optimized result.  

                                       Reinforcement learning is the equivalent of teaching someone to play a game.  
Common Techniques                     The rules and objectives are clearly defined. However, the outcome of any  

  •   Artificial Neural                single game depends on the judgment of the player who must adjust his  
    Networks (ANN)                     approach in response to the incumbent environment, skill and actions of a  

                                       given opponent.  
  •  Learning Automata 

  •   Markov Decision                  Practical Applications 
    Process (MDP) 

  •  Q-Learning 
                                                                                                NAVIGATION 

                                                                        ROBOTICS 

                                                              GAMING 

                                                         A Machine Learning Primer: The Basic Techniques              18 

----------------------- Page 19-----------------------

   HOT 
TOPICS                 Deep Learning 

                                                                                                              IMAGE   
                                                                                                              ANALYSIS 

      A modern, advanced machine learning technique that makes use of extremely sophis- 
      ticated neural networks. Called deep learning because the models gener ated are  

      significantly more complex or deep than traditional neural networks. Deep learning  

      models also ingest vastly larger amounts of data than their predecessors. 

      Why Is This Important? 

      Deep learning is the underpinning of many advanced machine learning systems                                                TEXT   
                                                                                                                             ANALYSIS 
      today. Perhaps most importantly, deep learning has vastly improved our ability to  

      understand and analyze image, sound and video. This has been made possible by  

      major advances in machine learning research as well as vast increases in both avail- 

      able data and massive computing power. 

                                                                                                              VIDEO ANALYSIS 

                                                            A Machine Learning Primer: The Basic Techniques                  19 

----------------------- Page 20-----------------------

   HOT 
TOPICS                 Cognitive Computing 

                                                                                                              CHATBOTS 

      Systems that seek to understand and emulate human behavior. As well as to provide a  

      more natural and intuitive interface between man and machine. This typically involves  

      deploying systems that interface with people in their “native tongue.” In other words,  

      without requiring a user to write or understand code. Cognitive computing platforms  

      accomplish this using a myriad of techniques including natural language processing,  

      advanced machine learning algorithms (including deep learning) and natural                              QUESTION-ANSWER  

      language generation.                                                                                    SYSTEMS 

      Why Is This Important? 

      Cognitive computing makes machines (software systems) more accessible and intu- 

      itive to engage with. As a result, cognitive computing may be the key to increasing  

      adoption of automated systems and analytic solutions. Ultimately, transcending the  
      man vs. machine barrier in favor of cooperative systems in which man and machine  

      seamlessly work together.  This is a precursor of what people commonly think of when  

      speaking of artificial intelligence. 
                                                                                                              PERSONAL   
                                                                                                              ASSISTANTS 

                                                            A Machine Learning Primer: The Basic Techniques                 20 

----------------------- Page 21-----------------------

   HOT 
TOPICS                 Natural Language Processing 

      Capabilities that allow machines to understand written language, voice commands                                      SENTIMENT  
      or both.  Natural language processing (NLP) includes the ability to translate language                                 ANALYSIS 

      into a form that a machine or algorithm can understand. Natural language generation  

      (NLG) allows the machine to then communicate results or responses in “plain English”                    LANGUAGE  
      (or any language it’s designed to support).                                                             TRANSLATION... 

      Why Is This Important? 

      Some NLP tools simply perform translation, mapping the words in a command to  

      a dictionary. More sophisticated applications strive for understanding: inferring  
      meaning or intent in order to inform an appropriate action or response. Given broad                                       ...AND   
                                                                                                                      UNDERSTANDING 
      variances in dialects, figures of speech, colloquialisms, individual mannerisms and  
      the rapid evolution of new modes of communication (abbreviations, emoticons) this  

      undertaking is not trivial. 

                                                                                                             VOICE-ENABLED  
                                                                                                              INTERFACES 

                                                            A Machine Learning Primer: The Basic Techniques                 21 

----------------------- Page 22-----------------------

  3 
          Points to Ponder 

----------------------- Page 23-----------------------

Why Can’t   

Anyone  

Explain How  
                                   Unlike traditional statistical models, the models created by machine  
the Machine  
                                   learning algorithms are extremely complex. While there is a method  
Reached this                       to the madness, it is not immediately obvious or linear. The exact path  

                                   through a neural network, for example, is not easy to trace. Thousands  

Conclusion?                        (and even billions!) of rules or parameters can define the model. As a  

                                   result, the exact internal processing pathways are a black box, even to  

                                   the data scientist!   

                                   The more important question: is the algorithm or method being  

                                   applied appropriately to the problem at hand? 

                                                          A Machine Learning Primer:  Points to Ponder           23 

----------------------- Page 24-----------------------

 If ML  

Algorithms                            If the analytic mechanisms or - more specifically, the logical  
Are Black                             processing pathway or rules - are not clear or easily reproducible, how  

                                      do you validate results?  

Boxes, How                            Don’t confuse black box processing with blind faith. When it comes to  
Can I Trust                           machine learning validation is deceptively simple.  
Them?                                 When tested against new data: 

                                           •    Does the algorithm accurately predict future events or result  

                                                in desired outcomes?  

                                           •    Can you put the output into action?  

                                      That’s it. No more, no less.  

                                                               A Machine Learning Primer:  Points to Ponder              24 

----------------------- Page 25-----------------------

Is It Really                         The validation criteria for a machine learning algorithm are simple. The  

                                     process of selecting, auditing and tuning an algorithm to deliver these  
That Simple?                         results is anything but.   

                                     Numerous factors must be accounted for: what algorithm(s) best suit  

                                     the problem or data? What data elements (aka features) should be  

                                     included? Can the data be cleansed, transformed or refined to better  
                                     expose key elements to the model (aka feature extraction and engi- 

                                     neering)? How should the algorithm’s parameters be configured or  

                                     tuned for optimal performance?  

                                     The model must also be cross-validated and audited to avoid artifi- 

                                     cially engineering a deceptively accurate response (aka overfitting). An  

                                     (admittedly) simplistic example: it is relatively easy to create a model  

                                     that predicts yesterday’s weather with a high degree of accuracy. But  

                                     that same model may not predict tomorrow’s weather as ably. Or be  

                                     the only model that works.  

                                     Ultimately, developing a functional machine learning system is an iter- 

                                     ative and intensive process that is part art and a lot of science. 

                                                             A Machine Learning Primer:  Points to Ponder             25 

----------------------- Page 26-----------------------

Is   
                                         Not always. Like traditional analytics, a majority of time on machine  

Complicated                              learning projects is spent munging, validating and formatting data. But  

                                         while data quality is always a concern, good enough is in the eye of  
and Clean                                the algorithm. Sometimes a simple algorithm with more data can often  
Always Better?                           beat a complicated algorithm with less data. Even when the bigger  

                                         data set is slightly dirtier.  

                                         When it comes to model accuracy, the higher the better. Or so it  

                                         would seem; especially to the inexperienced. However, for many prac- 

                                         tical applications minute improvements in model accuracy will not  

                                         result in germane operational improvements for the business. More  

                                         data and features may also unnecessarily complicate the algorithm.  

                                         The balancing act is between complexity and the ability to consume.  

                                         Note! Andrew Ng, Chief Data Scientist for Baidu and a leading ML  

                                         researcher, has posited that future advances in machine learning will  

                                         be less about new algorithms and more about enabling algorithms to  

                                         become smarter vis-à-vis the data that is fed into them. 

                                                                    A Machine Learning Primer:  Points to Ponder                   26 

----------------------- Page 27-----------------------

Does ML   

Make My  

Existing  
                                    Machine learning is a tool in the analytics toolbox. Like any tool it  

Analytics                           must be thoughtfully applied lest it becomes the proverbial hammer  
                                    looking for a nail. As machine learning emerged from academia, early  
Obsolete?                           adopters often found themselves expending significant time and effort  

                                    on problems that could have been easily solved utilizing traditional  

                                    statistical algorithms.  

                                    Therefore, machine learning is best seen as a supplement, not a  

                                    wholesale replacement, for traditional analytic methods.  

                                                            A Machine Learning Primer:  Points to Ponder            27 

----------------------- Page 28-----------------------

Does ML  
                                     Machine learning in practice requires human application of the scien- 

Render                               tific method and human communication skills.  
Humans                               The recipe is not as simple as: add data and stir.   
Obsolete?                            Humans, above and beyond the data scientist programming the algo- 

                                     rithm, are required to answer questions such as: 

                                          •   What are we trying to predict?  

                                          •    Are resulting correlations predictive? Causal? Are there  

                                              inherent biases?  

                                          •    Are results in line with expectations? Are there exceptions to  

                                              be addressed?  

                                          •   What is the predictive value and can it be generalized?  

                                          •   Can the model and results be applied in real life?  

                                          •   What is the proper response? 

                                                             A Machine Learning Primer:  Points to Ponder             28 

----------------------- Page 29-----------------------

  4 
            Best Practices 

----------------------- Page 30-----------------------

Machine learning is a synergistic exercise between man and machine.  

Machine learning in practice requires human application of the  

scientific method and human communication skills. Successful  

organizations have the analytic infrastructure, expertise and close  

collaboration between analytics and business subject matter experts. 

                                              A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices       30 

----------------------- Page 31-----------------------

#1                   Educate the Business on Concepts, not Theorems 

             Depending on your point of view, the inner workings of a neural network or deep learning  

             algorithm are riveting. Or, horribly complicated and mind-numbing. The truth is that most  

             people don’t need (and aren’t going to) understand the details.  Which isn’t to say education  

             isn’t required. Making the case for time and funding requires executives and business layper- 

             sons to broadly understand what machine learning can do.  

             A story that demonstrates how machine learning can be applied to your business will garner  

             more engagement than complicated algorithmic charts and discussions of p-values . Rather  

             than waxing rhapsodic about the technical nitty-gritty share examples of problems machine  

             learning can solve. Include case studies from other industries and like companies.  If you must  

             explain the method itself, think analogies not engineering diagrams. 

                                                               A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices          31 

----------------------- Page 32-----------------------

#2                   Make Machine Learning Part of the Discovery Process 

             Machine learning algorithms observe behaviors or the environment, detect a pattern, make a  

             generalization and infer an explanation or theory. The resulting probabilistic correlations may  

             predict outcomes with a high degree of accuracy. They do not necessarily pinpoint the factors  

             which create the outcome.   

             The bottom line? Prediction and causation are not the same. Business and policy decisions  

             must consider this when deciding if and how to put found insights into action. In some cases,  

             machine learning may identify areas for further study and consideration. In others, machine  

             learning algorithms themselves might be integrated into operational systems to automate key  

             decision points or processing pathways in real time. 

                                                               A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices           32 

----------------------- Page 33-----------------------

                                    Consider the following two cases: 

                                    The book Freakonomics highlights a case study in which the number of books  

                                    in a home was correlated to high standardized test scores. The study led to a  
CASE IN POINT                       mayoral program to send free books home to poorly performing children. The  

                                    results were decidedly less than stellar. 

                                    Contrast this with a study at the University of Ontario in which telemetry from  

                                    devices attached to premature babies in neonatal intensive care was analyzed  

                                    in real time. The systems predicted, with a high degree of accuracy, when a  

                                    premature infant was developing an infection. Even though clinical symptoms  

                                    did not present themselves until 48 hours later. The researchers and clinicians  

                                    still do not know HOW the machine identified the onset of infection. But in this  

                                    case, the important point was that it COULD. Ultimately, the team had to be  

                                    comfortable working and acting on correlation, without fully understanding  
                                    the causal relationship. 

                                                               A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices           33 

----------------------- Page 34-----------------------

#3                    Avoid Black Box Exercises 

              Yes, machine learning methods can seem obscure and are, in fact, often inscrutable. But  

              applying machine learning is not a black box activity. Humans, above and beyond the data  

              scientist programming the algorithm, are required to answer questions such as: 

              What are we trying to predict? 

              Like any analytic endeavor, machine learning projects should start with a clear statement of  

              the problem space or hypothesis to be explored.  

              What is best likely input into the process? 

              Data scientists and subject matter experts must work together to figure out the sources of  

              data and the key features for the machine. Data visualization can play a key role in helping to  

              highlight and test features that can be fed into machine learning algorithms.  

              Note! Even in unsupervised learning the machine doesn’t operate autonomously. Results are  

              affected by decisions about what data to expose. The Google machine vision experiment inde- 

              pendently identified pictures of cats. A different picture set would have resulted in a different  

              entity being identified.  

                                                                   A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices             34 

----------------------- Page 35-----------------------

#3                    Avoid Black Box Exercises (cont’d) 

             Are results in line with expectations? Are there exceptions to be addressed?  What are impli- 

             cations if they are not?  

             Consider Stanford and Google’s work in computer vision. While dang good, it’s not foolproof.  

             Goats get characterized as dogs, a field of tulips as hot air balloons.  Minor gaffs to be sure,  

              but what are the implications when people are incorrectly categorized?  

             How can (and should) results be applied?  

              Machine learning is great at determining what to do. Not necessarily so good at defining how  

             (although this is changing fast). 

             What is the proper response?  

              For instance, when a pattern emerges with global health or political ramifications what is the  

              proper next step or steps? 

                                                                  A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices           35 

----------------------- Page 36-----------------------

#4                     Apply Appropriate Scientific Rigor 

               Machine learning does not negate the need for solid statistical reasoning, scientific and data  

               analysis. While extremely powerful, it is not a magical, self-correcting analytical panacea. At  

               least not yet. 

               Machine learning is most effective when the data scientist has a solid understanding about  

               how to structure the system. In other words, the developer can identify the appropriate  

               algorithm(s) based on the domain and how attributes of the data will respond. The process  

               requires both knowledge of the characteristics of different algorithms and a healthy dose of  

               intuition. 

               Forewarning! Even with experience, developing a machine learning application is an experi- 

               mental and iterative process: regardless of whether the team is using well-known algorithms.  

               In every case, the algorithms must be trained and tuned for the business context and data at  

               hand.  

              Teams must also apply a healthy (but not paralyzing) dose of skepticism and rigor to validate  

              the model lest they fall into the trap of “believing everything they think.”   

                                                                      A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices                36 

----------------------- Page 37-----------------------

                                      Examples of failure to critically analyze analytic models abound.  

CASE IN POINT                         In one instance, a team of genomics scientists created an algorithm for  

                                      predicting a patient’s response to chemotherapy. Unfortunately, they didn’t  

                                      account for data variations and data integrity issues in their initial training  

                                      data set. This led to some unfortunate consequences, the least of which were  

                                      canceled clinical trials. 

                                      In another, economists published a paper adversely linking GDP growth  

                                      with high government debt. Questions were later raised regarding factor  

                                      weighting used in the regression model which, when modified, led to dramati- 

                                      cally different conclusions.  

                                                                   A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices              37 

----------------------- Page 38-----------------------

#5                       Make it Just Complicated Enough 

               Generally speaking, more data wins. But do more features (aka attributes or data points) also  
               equate to better outcomes? Not always. The catch-22 is that larger data sets beget larger vari- 

               ations in data and a larger potential for predictive error.  

               In many cases, weaker models with more data do better than more complicated models with  

               less.  Even if the data is dirtier. This is the basis of ensemble modeling techniques which use  

               the ‘power of the collective’ to predict results. 

               Deploying machine learning artfully is a balancing act. One in which the incremental predic- 

               tive value of complexity must be weighed against interpretability, ease of use and applica- 

               bility.  

               Of course, simplicity is not the only virtue. Ultimately, the model must also perform well under  

               realistic operating conditions. 

                                                                           A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices                   38 

----------------------- Page 39-----------------------

CASE IN POINT 
                                     The best model is for naught if it can’t be put into operational practice.  
                                     Consider the Netflix Prize in which Netflix challenged the data science  

                                     community to create a highly performing model to predict “what you should  

                                     watch next.” The winning model exceeded all expectations; predicting user  

                                     preferences at an unprecedented level.  

                                     The problem? The model’s data and processing requirements made it impos- 

                                     sible to execute in real time or near real time – a key requirement when trying  

                                    to attract the attention of users looking for a flick to watch right now! The  

                                     result? A fantastically accurate model with no applicable business value. 

                                                                A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices            39 

----------------------- Page 40-----------------------

#6                   Actively Engage Business Users in Validation 

             The data scientist must apply due diligence as the model is created and tuned. To do so, they  

             must effectively communicate and collaborate with data and business domain experts to vali- 

             date and vet the model. This is critical to ensure the team has, amongst other things:   

             Validated that all the options have been considered. 

             A model being significantly accurate doesn’t preclude other equally well-fitting models from  

             existing. And those models may suggest alternate conclusions.  

             Accounted for potential bias. 

             Algorithms – for all that they feed on data – are not inherently fool-proof or unbiased. Beyond  

             subconscious biases unwittingly introduced, the data provided to a model can reflect biases  

             by virtue of the decisions by which the data was created. As mathematician Jeremy Kun  

             elegantly stated, “training on human-generated data (aka found data) means the inherent  

             biases of a population (minority or majority) or the underlying process will be inherited.”  

             Identified the impact and implications of putting found insight into action. 

                                                                A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices           40 

----------------------- Page 41-----------------------

#  7                 Employ Data Storytelling 

             Like other techniques, machine learning insights can suffer a failure in translation between the  
             data science teams and end consumers. Therefore, in addition to questions posed above, the  

             team must carefully consider how found insights will be delivered and consumed.  

             To start, teams must determine how to present in a manner that is palatable and consumable.  

             This is particularly important when found insights challenge existing paradigms or require  

             changes to standard operating procedures. Rather than slaying your audience with numbers  

             and statistical values, can the results be visualized and supported by a compelling story?  

             Forewarned! Don’t make up a compelling story. Rather, create a narrative that shows how the  

             findings drive operational improvements or enable innovative new products and services – in  

             terms and context the audience understands.  

                                                               A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices           41 

----------------------- Page 42-----------------------

#  8                  Don’t Underestimate the Power of Perception 

             With machine learning, an individual’s future actions can be predicted with a high degree of  
             confidence. Creating the potential for what data scientist John Foreman, MailChimp’s chief  

             data scientist and self-professed “recovering management consultant” called “laser-guided  

             disingenuous arguments” for targeting and marketing. The ethics (including the privacy vs.  

             value debate) are important and must be addressed upfront.  

             Another consideration: how does our expectation of fallibility change when a machine  

             decides?   

             As “machines” increasingly encroach into visible decision-making roles and engagement we  

             must account for the human reaction. Building trust in these systems is critical for full adoption  

             and engagement. 

                                                                 A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices          42 

----------------------- Page 43-----------------------

CASE IN POINT 
                                   What happens when a self-navigating car crashes? How likely are we to  
                                   forgive that accident? Even if it’s a mistake a human driver makes with greater  

                                   frequency.  

                                   Studies have shown machine learning to be 72 percent accurate in diagnosing  

                                   breast cancer from a mammogram. A human doctor? 65 percent. But does a  

                                   patient’s expectation change when a machine makes or misses the diagnosis?  

                                                             A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices           43 

----------------------- Page 44-----------------------

# 9                  Proactively Adapt Business Processes 

             Deploying machine learning systems may require us to be willing to give up control as we  

             automate certain decisions and actions. Machine learning may also enable development of  
             entirely new products, services or customer engagement models.  

             Careful consideration must be given to the resulting business implications.  

                  •    Is the organization ready and willing to take action and make necessary changes to  

                      incorporate found insights?  

                  •   What existing business processes and roles must be modified? 

                  •   Will net new processes or roles be required?  

                  •    If the machine learning model will be autonomous, how will automated systems work  

                      within the context of human workflows?  Make sense to their human counterparts or  

                      co-workers? 

                                                               A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices          44 

----------------------- Page 45-----------------------

                                    Manufacturers are applying machine learning to identify potential equipment  

                                    failures just in time, before they happen. This requires fitting equipment with  

                                    sensors and embedding analytic sensing systems. It also precipitates a funda- 

CASE IN POINT                       mental rethink of customer service, maintenance and warranty policies and  

                                    procedures.   

                                    Merchandisers are utilizing machine learning for real-time online pricing. In  

                                    this case, the machine determines optimal price points while gross thresh- 

                                    olds are validated by humans. A feedback loop allows the algorithm to learn  

                                    from observed sales results. Another takes buyer input on missed opportuni- 

                                    ties or errors.  This seemingly simple shift required a seismic change in how  

                                    merchandisers and buyers were measured and incented.  

                                    In Amazon’s automated distribution centers humans do the packing while  

                                    robotic systems collect required supplies and validate the right stuff gets in  
                                    the box. What makes it all work? The interaction between human and robot.  

                                    Underscoring the point that deliberate design of not just the algorithm, but  

                                    the ongoing engagement between man and machine, is critical to success. 

                                                              A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices           45 

----------------------- Page 46-----------------------

#10                     Plan for Ongoing Care and Feeding 

               To stay current and deliver results, machine learning algorithms must be continuously  
               refreshed and refined based on data that reflect current circumstances. This is true whether  

               evaluating the impact of new customer micro-segments on retention or rebalancing the  

               network to account for unexpected spikes in energy demands to avoid blackouts.  

               If you apply machine learning successfully – incenting consumers to buy more, utilize different  

               commercial channels, and turn right not left – the patterns used to create the model are  

               changed. Machine learning models need to adjust to account for these shifts in behavior. Your  

               business processes do too. 

               In this case, operationalization is not a merely keep the lights on activity. Maintaining the  

               model is a critical, ongoing process that requires as much, if not more, due diligence as initial  

               model development. 

                                                                   A Machine Learning Primer:  Best Practices            46 

----------------------- Page 47-----------------------

  5 
          Are You Ready? 

----------------------- Page 48-----------------------

   þ Are You Ready for Machine Learning? 

CHECKLIST 

             Articulate a Problem That Needs Solving 

              Machine learning works best when there is a clear problem statement. The problem definition should  

              include actions to be enabled and/or measurable outcomes to be achieved. Even better? If the  

              problem is clearly tied to top-of-mind operational challenges or strategic objectives.  

              Because machine learning is time and data intensive, a critical evaluation of whether existing analytic  

              models/approaches or alternate solutions may apply is also in order. This ensures potential value is  

             commensurate with input effort. 

             Note! Routine decision points that are high-volume, require immediate or rapid response and/or are  

             dependent on highly variable inputs are good candidates for machine learning.  

                                                               A Machine Learning Primer: Are You Ready?             48 

----------------------- Page 49-----------------------

   þ Are You Ready for Machine Learning? 

CHECKLIST 

               Establish an Experimental Mindset 

               Machine learning is an iterative, experimental process. Although core algorithms are increasingly  

               commoditized, every project must be customized based on the business context and data. As with  
               any good experiment, some hypotheses will be proven false. New data may need to be procured or  

               created. Or the problem statement recast based on what is found. As a result, decision makers and  

               team members alike must adopt a test-and-learn mentality for machine learning to succeed. Use a  

               gated, iterative process that provides the flexibility and agility to quickly assess progress to determine  

               whether an alternate approach is warranted or when enough is enough.   

               Enlist a Collaborative Data Science Team 

               ML expertise is a requirement. Equally important is a dynamic teaming model that engages diverse  

               experts with business, data and technical expertise. This includes data experts that can assess and  

               onboard requisite data assets, business experts to provide context, assess implications (business,  

               social, moral) of proposed actions or new product or service offerings and IT personnel who deploy  

               and maintain the technical ecosystems. Not to be overlooked: resources who can translate between  

               the language of the “quant” (i.e. those who speak math) and that of the business. 

                                                                A Machine Learning Primer: Are You Ready?              49 

----------------------- Page 50-----------------------

   þ Are You Ready for Machine Learning? 

CHECKLIST 

               Develop a Robust Data Strategy and Ecosystem 

               Machine learning runs on data. A lot of data. Establishing a data process to effectively identify, acquire  

               (or create), provision and access high-quality data and information assets is critical. To that end,  

               governance policies and the data ecosystem must support exploratory environments (often referred  

               as sandboxes) as well as production environments. This requires a multi-tiered approach to balance  

               access and agility without sacrificing security, privacy, or quality. The introduction of non-traditional  

               (big) data sources including unstructured text, voice, pictures and so on may also require new data  

               management capabilities. 

               Assess the Organization’s Risk Tolerance 

               From agreeing on the criteria for what is “good enough” to understanding how to validate and  

               develop models, machine learning often challenges traditional approaches to quality assurance and  

               risk management. Why? At some point, the training wheels or, in this case, the training data must  
               come off. Real validation comes from testing the performance of the machine against new data. Very  

               often, this entails putting the system into operational practice. This may range from performing “A/B  

               testing” in production to confirm a model will incent desired customer behaviors to taking a self- 

               driving car on the road with a human overseer ready to take the wheel in a crisis.   

                                                                 A Machine Learning Primer: Are You Ready?               50 

----------------------- Page 51-----------------------

   þ Are You Ready for Machine Learning? 

CHECKLIST 

              Commit to Adapting Established Business Processes  

              Whether automating an existing decision point or enabling a net new product or service offering,  

              ML is disruptive. Assessing potential implications to existing business processes, functions and roles  

              is key. This doesn’t mean architecting the entire change before you start. But a quick gut check can  

              mitigate the potential for costly moot exercises. To plan for the plan, begin by asking: “If we answer  

              this question or provide this hypothesis, what can we do with the information? How might this impact  

              existing processes? Are we willing and able to make the requisite changes?” 

              Commit to Adopting New IT Practices 

              Once deployed, iterative modeling and tuning of the machine learning model should continue. The  

              cadence at which updates are required is unpredictable, not conforming to traditional scheduled  
              deployment windows. As a result, deploying machine learning requires fundamentally different QA  

              and deployment models, skill sets and service levels than traditional IT DevOps practices.  

                                                               A Machine Learning Primer: Are You Ready?              51 

----------------------- Page 52-----------------------

                                               Want to Learn More? 

RESOURCES 

                                                         C 
                                                         o 
                                                         m 
                                                          p 
                                                          l 
                                                           i 
                                                           m 
                                                           e                    The Evolution of Analytics: Opportunities and Challenges  
                                                            n 
                                                            t 
                                                            s 
                                                              o 
                                                             f 

                 The Evolution                                                  for Machine Learning in Business 
                 of Analytics                                                   Take a closer look at how modern machine learning applications are deliv- 

                 Opportunities and Challenges for                               ering business value today. Includes two case studies highlighting steps orga- 
                 Machine Learning in Business 

                                                                                nizations are taking to utilize machine learning to discover the insight hidden  

                                                                                inside their data. 

                 Patrick Hall                                                   An Executive’s Guide to Cognitive Computing 
                 Wen Phan 
                 Katie Whitson 

                                                                                SAS EVP and CTO Oliver Schabenberger demystifies cognitive computing  
                                                                                by sharing relatable examples and key lessons learned on where and how to  

                                                                                apply this emerging capability for ultimate effect. 

                                                                                                                                   A Machine Learning Primer: Are You Ready?                                                                       52 

----------------------- Page 53-----------------------

                     About the Author 

KIMBERLY NEVALA is the Director of Business Strategies for  

SAS Best Practices. Kimberly brings 19 years of on-the-ground  

experience advising clients worldwide to help organizations  

maximize their data potential. She is responsible for market  

analysis, industry education, emerging best practices and strat- 

egies in the areas of business intelligence and analytics, data  

governance and management. 

A speaker and author, Kimberly is often consulted on the topic  

of strategic enablement and organizational dynamics. Her work  

has been featured on Information Week, CIO Asia, Knowledge  

World and TDWI. Kimberly is the author of The Anatomy of an  

Analytic Enterprise, Sustainable Data Governance and Top 10  

Mistakes to Avoid When Launching a Data Governance Program. 

SAS and all other SAS Institute Inc. product or service names are registered trademarks or trademarks of SAS Institute Inc. in the USA  and other countries.  
® indicates USA registration. Other brand and product names are trademarks of their respective companies. 108796_G48853.0317 

                                        ©2017 SAS Institute Inc. All rights reserved. 

                                        SAS Institute Inc. 
                                         100 SAS Campus Drive 
                                        Cary, NC 27513-2414, USA 
                                         Phone: 919-677-8000 
                                         Fax: 919-677-4444 
                                         Email: bestpractices@SAS.com 
