The New Wave of 
Artificial Intelligence 
WHITEPAPER 

LABS PAGE 2 
1. INTRODUCTION 
. What is Artificial 
Intelligence? 
. The only thing you 
need to know 
about A.I. 
2. WHY A.I. IS 
DIFFERENT THIS TIME 
. The decreasing 
cost of computing 
power 
. The availability of 
data 
. Better algorithms 
. Conclusion 
3. WHAT IS 
INTELLIGENCE 
. Emergence 
. What Emergence 
means for A.I. 
4. THE EMERGING 
A.I. ECONOMY 
. The Machine 
Intelligence 
business landscape 
. A glimpse at some 
innovative 
companies 
. Summary 
5. A.I. IN BANKING 
. Wealth 
Management for 
the masses 
. Customer support/ 
help desk 
. Advanced 
Analytics 
. Fraud Detection 
. Underwriting 
. Steps forward 
CONTENT 

PAGE 3 LABS 
Foreword 
In this research paper we will explore the current 
wave of A.I. technologies and A.I. businesses. We 
will start off with our main hypothesis of why A.I. is 
different this time. This is followed by a quick 
survey of the emerging A.I. economy where we 
will look at examples of companies leveraging this 
new technology to disrupt existing industries and 
create new ones. This will hopefully give the 
reader some feeling of what kind of applications 
A.I. is used for today. 

LABS PAGE 4 
We are living in the midst of a surge of interest and 
research into Artificial Intelligence (hereby A.I.). It can 
seem like every week there is a new breakthrough in the 
field and a new record set in some task previously done 
by humans. Not too long ago, A.I. seemed a distant 
dream for especially interested researchers. Today it is all 
around us. We carry it in our pockets, it's in our cars and 
in many of the web services we use throughout the day. 
As this technology matures, every business must ask itself 
the central question: how will this disrupt my industry? 
Throughout this research paper, we will investigate the 
possible implications of the rise of A.I. on the banking 
industry. 
What is Artificial Intelligence? 
If we ask Wikipedia; Artificial Intelligence (AI) is "the 
intelligence exhibited by machines or software. It is also 
the name of the academic field of study which studies 
how to create computers and computer software that 
are capable of intelligent behavior". While this seems like 
a reasonable definition, a lot of people struggle with 
identifying the difference between AI and ordinary 
software. This is a fair point, as there is no clear line 
between the two concepts. For the purpose of this 
paper, it is best to avoid the technical definitions used 
by academics in the field, and instead think of AI 
technology as the sort of technology you would use to 
do tasks that require some level of intelligence to 
accomplish. With the added feature that AI systems 
often are the kind of systems deployed in domains 
where there is a lot of uncertainty. The simplest example 
of this is a chess computer vs. a calculator. Both chess 
and arithmetic requires some level of intelligence, but 
whereas in chess there is a lot of uncertainty with regards 
to the opponents next move, the routine calculations 
performed by a calculator contains no uncertainty. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
No easy definition of what is AI 
and what is just normal IT. 
1. INTRODUCTION 

PAGE 5 LABS 
The only thing you need to know about A.I. 
This is not the first period of massive public interest in A.I. 
In fact, A.I.'s long history of being “The Next Big Thing” 
has led the current top researchers in the field to publicly 
downplay their findings, in order to avoid the hype 
getting out of hand. Ever since the start of the field, the 
long term goal of A.I. research has been what is called 
Strong A.I., a computerized brain capable of doing 
every intelligence task that a human can perform. 
Roughly every decade since the 1950's, promises have been made about the impending arrival of Strong A.I., 
and every time these promises were broken, all the 
funding for A.I. research dried up in what the industry 
calls “A.I. Winters”. 
This brings us to one of the main points of this research 
paper. We are now at a point where the disruptive force 
of A.I. technology no longer hinges on whether or not 
Strong A.I. is ever achieved. The only thing you as a 
business person need to know about A.I. is this: the 
technology has now matured to a level where it, 
regardless of future progress in the field, is set to disrupt 
almost any technology based industry. The reasons for 
this will be explained Figure 1: A chess board. in the following sections. 
Source: http://pixshark.com/chess.htm 
A.I has followed a classic boom 
and bust cycle ever since. 

LABS PAGE 6 
It is a saying in finance that the most expensive four 
words in the English language is “This time it's different”. 
The saying is meant to imprint caution in the mind of 
people looking to invest in hyped assets with a history of 
disappointment. Given the history of A.I., one might do 
well to keep this in mind. However, is it possible to find 
any justification for why it is, in fact, different this time? 
Kevin Kelly, the founding executive editor of Wired, lists 
the following three reasons. 
The decreasing cost of computing power 
Thinking, for all practical purposes, is computation. And 
in order to simulate a system that is even remotely 
intelligent, a great number of computations are needed. 
Moore's law, which says that the number of transistors on 
integrated circuits double roughly every two years, has 
provided growing computational capacity for the last 
five decades. But this is not enough. Luckily, it was 
discovered during the last decade that GPUs, the chips 
used for generating computer graphics in video games 
etc., were eminently suited to run the sort of massive 
parallel computations needed for building A.I. 
architecture. In practical terms, this has meant that 
calculations that used to take up to several weeks, now 
take less then a day, and the time is shrinking. Building 
intelligent applications would simply not be possible 
without the increase in cheap, available computing 
power that we have been fortunate to witness the last 
decades. 
2 
WHY A.I. IS DIFFERENT THIS TIME 
Google, Facebook, Baidu etc. 
are hiring all the A.I. experts they 
can get their hands on 
2. WHY A.I. IS DIFFERENT THIS TIME 

PAGE 7 LABS 
The availability of data 
It is no coincidence that the recent intense interest in A.I. 
from the tech industry comes right after Big Data 
became a household word. The by far biggest investors 
in A.I. technology are Facebook, Google, Yahoo, Baidu 
and Microsoft. They have hired almost all the leading 
researchers in the field and setup their own research labs 
internally. The common denominator for these 
companies is that they sit on truly massive amounts of 
data that they need to analyze. A.I. bears the promise of 
an automatic analysis and management of this data, 
which is what these companies are looking for. There is 
an interesting symbiosis between A.I. research and data: 
Just like the brain of a child, an A.I. system needs huge 
amounts of information in order to learn. And companies 
who sit on huge amounts of information usually wants to 
minimize the human effort of analyzing this data. This 
relationship is bound to fuel the development of A.I. 
going forward. A nice example of this is IBM's Watson 
engine. Watson is a distributed cognitive system, 
meaning that it is spread out in the cloud, collecting 
information every time it's being used, everywhere. This 
means that the more people use Watson, the better the 
system becomes at it's job. 
Several breakthroughs in 
algorithms for machine learning 
during the last decade. 

LABS PAGE 8 
Better algorithms 
A new type of algorithms lies at the heart of this new A.I. 
wave and it's safe to say that without these, the data 
and computing power would amount to nothing. It 
might come as a surprise that it is all based on 
technology from the 50's, called Artificial Neural 
Networks (ANN), which is an attempt to model the 
network of nerve cells in a human brain on a computer. 
Loosely speaking, it is a interconnected web of artificial 
neurons that either fire or not based on what the input to 
the neuron is. A key part of building these neural 
networks, is to be able to train them to do the correct 
thing when they see data. Even though this technology 
is as old as the field of A.I. itself, it was not until recently 
(2007) that we had the algorithms to train truly big 
networks that could solve more interesting problems. The 
study of these algorithms has now spawned its own subfield 
of A.I. known as Deep Learning, its name 
referencing the number of neuron layers in the neural 
networks. 
Moore’s law has not yet failed, 
and innovations have been 
made in utilizing graphics 
processors. 
2. WHY A.I. IS DIFFERENT THIS TIME 

PAGE 9 LABS 
Conclusion 
The combination of the three factors outlined above 
have laid the ground for a wealth of consumer and 
business facing applications, most of which we have not 
yet seen. There exists a big gap between where 
businesses could be and where they are in terms of 
building internal competency with, and implementing, 
this technology. It is precisely because of this gap that 
we maintain the hypothesis that the disruptive force of 
A.I. is almost completely independent of the future 
progression of the field. It has already arrived. 
Figure 2: Moore's law. 
Source: The Economist 

LABS PAGE 10 
The field of A.I. can seem quite daunting for nonspecialists 
and part of the reason for this is because the 
way we think about intelligence has changed during the 
last couple of decades. This has had the result that it can 
be very hard for non-experts to understand what this 
technology can be used for. As will be explained in this 
section, it's all about changing how one thinks about 
intelligence. 
In the beginning of the field of A.I.'s existence, one 
thought that the way to approach it was to instill a 
computer with logical 'rules' that would result in rational 
behavior, and then populate this computer with facts 
about the world in a big “Knowledge Table”. This 
approach was later shown to be doomed to fail. 
Manually typing in facts about the world, and hoping 
that strict rules would help the computer understand the 
relations between these facts, becomes exponentially 
cumbersome as you add more facts. 
3 WHAT IS INTELLIGENCE 
General A.I. would have a 
human or superhuman level of 
intelligence 
3. WHAT IS INTELLIGENCE 

PAGE 11 LABS 
Emergence 
The fact is that we do not really understand what 
intelligence is or where it comes from. This goes for not 
only the artificial kind, but also our innate intelligence. 
One reason for this problem is the many different 
definitions of intelligence. However, there have been 
some developments 'lately'. Science has throughout the 
last decades increasingly adopted the view of 
intelligence as an emergent property of some complex 
systems. That means that the aggregate behavior of 
very simple parts of certain complex systems lead to 
intelligent behavior. The part of you or the people you 
know that is responsible for what can be called 
intelligent behavior is in reality a finely tuned network of 
very simple parts. This view of intelligence as the 
behavior of simple parts in a complex system has some 
interesting consequences, because it has led to scientists 
finding what fits this definition of intelligence in surprising 
places. For example, a single termite is not especially 
smart. One might even go so far as to call it stupid. But a 
termite colony exhibits intelligent behavior in the sense 
that it builds complex structures to live in, which even 
has built-in fungus farms for food supply. This type of 
behavior can be seen many places in the insect world: 
the aggregate behavior of “simple” insects is surprisingly 
complex and adaptive to changes in the colony's 
environment. The effectiveness of the bugs' methods has 
not been lost on the people in computer science. There 
is now an entire class of algorithms known as Swarm 
Intelligence algorithms that attempt to solve problems in 
this decentralized, self-organizing way. 
A specialist A.I. can drive a car or 
play chess, not very good outside 
it’s domain. 

LABS PAGE 12 
What Emergence means for A.I. 
This whole new wave of artificial intelligence research 
and technology really hinges on this “emergence-view” 
of intelligence being a useful way to analyze intelligent 
systems. The reason for this is that if intelligence is not an 
emergent phenomenon, then humans will have to build 
intelligent systems from scratch. That is simply not 
feasible. So this is why most modern A.I. systems are built 
with the purpose of self-learning through emergent 
complex behavior of simple parts. The most common 
example of this is Artificial Neural Networks (see Figure 3 
on next page for an illustration). 
Each node in a network like the one in Figure 3 is simply 
a function that either outputs a 1 or a 0 based on its 
input from other neurons. But with enough of these 
neurons stacked in layers one after another, and with 
enough training data, a network somewhat like this can 
be taught to recognize faces and other objects in 
pictures. One of the more impressive examples of this is a 
system by Google (Figure 4) that can automatically 
caption images. It does this by using one neural network 
to attempt to recognize all the important objects in the 
picture, then it uses a second neural network to 
generate sentences about the relationship between 
these objects. What these examples show is that the 
correct set of algorithms, with the correct training can 
learn to distinguish signal from noise in a way that is 
meaningful to humans. The fact that the input data in 
these examples are pictures is irrelevant. This begs the 
question of what we will be able to build with systems 
whose sensory input consists entirely of say bank 
customer data, transaction data including fraud cases, 
stock prices and so on. These are the questions that 
some of the companies in the next section attempt to 
answer. 
Figure 3: Example architecture of a 
Artificial Neural Network 
3. WHAT IS INTELLIGENCE 

Source: http://googleresearch.blogspot.co.uk/2014/11/a-picture-is-worth-thousand-coherent.html PAGE 13 LABS 
Figure 4: The automatic captioning system recognizes 
objects in photographs and then tries to choose a 
sentence that explains the scene. 

LABS PAGE 14 
Talk of artificial intelligence often creates images of 
HAL9000 from 2001: A Space Odyssey or Skynet from the 
Terminator movies. This is only natural, as Hollywood for a 
long time has been one of the main providers of futuristic 
visions to the public. However, to get a more realistic 
picture of how this technology will affect the world 
around us, it probably makes more sense to study the 
business models of the companies trying to build this 
future right now. In the following sections, we will have a 
look at the technology landscape of the Machine 
Intelligence industry, and look at companies that are 
using A.I. to deliver services in a way that might surprise 
you. 
The Machine Intelligence business 
landscape 
A good way to get a feel for an up-and-coming 
technology industry is to build what is called a 
technology landscape. A technology landscape is 
nothing more than a big picture with a lot of company 
logos on it, where the companies are segmented by the 
problem they are trying to address or value they want to 
offer. In 2014, a Venture Capitalist at Bloomberg Beta 
named Shivon Zilis spent three months building just such 
a technology landscape for what she calls the machine 
intelligence sector (Shown in a too small picture in Figure 
5). She built a list of over 2 500 A.I. or machine learning 
related companies and start-ups and narrowed it down 
to what you see in Figure 5. The landscape is sliced 
nicely into the following segments, which we will go 
through in turn: Core Technologies, Rethinking Enterprise, 
Rethinking Industries, Rethinking Humans/HCI and 
Supporting Technologies. 
“Whoever wins AI, wins the 
internet” – Andrew Ng, Chief 
Data Scientist at Baidu. 
4 
THE EMERGING A.I. ECONOMY 
4. THE EMERGING A.I. ECONOMY 

PAGE 15 LABS 
Figure 5: The Machine Intelligence Landscape, by Shivon Zilis. 
CORE TECHNOLOGIES 
RETHINKING ENTERPRISE 
SUPPORTING TECHNOLOGIES 
RETHINKING INDUSTRIES 
RETHINKING HUMANS / HCI 
Source: www.shivonzilis.com/machineintelligence 

LABS PAGE 16 
The companies in the Core Technologies segment are 
the ones working directly with advancing the A.I. and 
Machine Learning fields. They range from technology 
providers to other A.I. driven companies, to companies 
providing advanced analytics products directly to the 
end user. 
This segment contains the companies attempting to 
leverage machine intelligence in order to build smarter 
enterprise solutions for companies in general. Examples 
of this range from advanced churn prediction software, 
that can alert sale teams that a customer is growing 
dissatisfied (Preakt), to smart fraud detection, that 
analyzes fraud in real-time using over 5 000 signals (Sift 
Science). 
The Rethinking Industries segment is composed of 
companies using A.I. to change the way things are done 
in existing industries. It is here you will find many of the 
more “sexy” A.I. start-ups. Among them, we have 
Knewton, which aims to deliver personalized education 
to every student, Lex Machina, which offers an analytics 
engine that lawyers can use to search for similar cases, 
relevant laws etc., and many others. 
This is the wild card category containing the more sci-fi 
like companies. Here you will find companies attempting 
to make computers understand human emotions and 
designers of various augmented reality products. 
The companies in this segment offer products or services 
that enable the companies in the other segments to do 
their thing. This ranges from chip makers, to providers of 
user friendly software for web-scraping and other 
information gathering. Among the more exciting and 
ambitious projects in this segment, we have HP and IBM's 
attempts to rethink the way we do computing by 
designing what is called neuromorphic (brainlike) 
hardware. 
CORE TECHNOLOGIES 
RETHINKING ENTERPRISES 
RETHINKING INDUSTRIES 
SUPPORTING TECHNOLOGIES 
RETHINKING HUMANS/ HCI 
4. THE EMERGING A.I. ECONOMY 

PAGE 17 LABS 
A glimpse at some innovative companies 
In order to get a better feeling for how A.I. is driving new 
types of businesses, we will take a more thorough look at 
some of the companies from the landscape. 
Deepmind, Numenta, Vicarious 
For the purpose of this research paper, these companies 
are so similar that we might as well bundle them 
together. All three companies are trying to solve the 
Strong A.I. problem, and all three are backed by titans 
of the Tech industry: Deepmind is backed by Google, 
Vicarious by Mark Zuckerberg and Elon Musk, and 
Numenta by Palm Computing founder Jeff Hawkins. 
While all three companies have examples of 
applications for their products, they more resemble 
private sector research labs than conventional 
companies. 
But these companies are not interesting because of their 
products' immediate applications, but because they 
represent the front line in an ever-intensifying arms race 
in Silicon Valley. As put by Andrew Ng of Stanford and 
Chinese search giant Baidu, “Whoever wins A.I., wins the 
internet”. These companies mark an interesting shift in 
the development of core A.I. technology. The 
technology used to drive the current generation of A.I. 
applications was usually conceived at academic 
institutions and then later adopted by corporates. Now, 
we have a situation where the tech giants have placed 
a large number of the industry's experts in their internal 
laboratories, which might lead to less openness about 
technical breakthroughs going forward. 
These three companies are 
chasing “Strong AI”. No focus on 
short term rewards or commercial 
application. Biggest disruptive 
potential. 

LABS PAGE 18 
VIV - The Global Brain 
VIV is the brainchild of the original team behind Apple's 
A.I. assistant Siri. Siri is one of the first examples of an A.I. 
helper that the the public actually has appreciated 
(remember Microsoft's Office Assistant paperclip?). She 
could search the web for you, send texts, set alarms and 
even had a sense of humor. The creators however, felt 
that the project had stopped short of what was possible. 
So right after the death of Steve Jobs, they left Apple to 
set up VIV Labs, where they are now hatching their next 
creation. Their ambition for VIV is to create a truly 
generalist A.I. assistant for all platforms. They have 
designed it around three principles: It will be taught by 
the world, it will know more than it is taught and it will 
learn something new every day. That means that if it 
helps you solving a problem after some trial and error, 
then that solution becomes available for every other 
user that encounters the same problem afterwards. 
Having VIV help you find a suitable wine for lasagna on 
your way to your friend's house is one of their more 
impressive examples. VIV is a good example of the 
companies that believe that a lot of people will in the 
near future interface with some form of machine 
intelligence instead of using e.g. web browsers when 
carrying out tasks like buying airplane tickets. As the 
technology becomes less visible and more human-like in 
its capabilities, it becomes easier to use for everyone. 
The Grid 
The founder of The Grid, Dan Tocchini, used to work as a 
website designer. After a couple of years in the industry, 
he began to find the tasks menial and repetitive. Every 
time a business is changing something about itself, 
offering a new product, entering new markets etc. that 
change needs to be reflected in the website. This usually 
The Grid is an example of a 
specialized “servant AI”. 
Designed to do work humans find 
boring. 
4. THE EMERGING A.I. ECONOMY 

PAGE 19 LABS 
means that a person needs to do the painstaking work 
of changing the design of the website to reflect the 
change in the business. Enter The Grid. The Grid is 
designed to be a A.I. driven website builder. Users 
upload raw content in the form of text, pictures and 
other media. Then they specify the purpose of the 
website, be it business, social or some other type. After 
that, The Grid's engine takes care of the rest and 
compiles your input into a working website designed to 
achieve what the web-site's owner wants, e.g. 
promoting higher sales or new customers. 
The Grid represents the type of companies that want to 
alleviate the load of performing certain types of work by 
using A.I. instead of outsourcing. For example, instead of 
having a call center in an offshore location, a company 
can have a call center at home manned by artificial 
intelligence agents. This is a phenomenon that is bound 
to become more and more prevalent as the range of 
tasks that A.I. agents can perform continues to grow. 
Summary 
The companies shown in this small selection illustrate the 
breadth of this emerging industry. And that breadth is 
one of the key things one needs to understand about 
the ambitions of this field. The vision for the people 
behind VIV and a large part of the A.I. crowd is that this 
technology will be like a utility in the future. Much like we 
now use electricity or water to solve problems, the hope 
is that intelligent computation will be a general resource 
in the same way. This way of looking at intelligent 
computation really broadens the scope of what one 
can imagine using this technology for. 

LABS PAGE 20 
The purpose of the preceding sections is to get the 
reader thinking about how the technologies surveyed 
could be tweaked and applied to banking. One 
problem of technology with broad applications is that it 
can be hard to know where to start applying it. Another 
question is the maturity of the technology across 
application areas. 
Wealth Management for the masses 
One of the banking areas that have seen a lot of 
investment in machine intelligence is wealth 
management. Both incumbents and newcomers are 
realizing that the digital shift that is happening in banking 
will affect this sector. UBS, a Swiss heavy-weight in the 
wealth management business, recently acquired a 
seven year old startup called Sqreem after it held an 
innovation competition that Sqreem won. Sqreem's forte 
is automatic analysis of large amounts of unstructured 
data with the purpose of detecting “typical” behavioral 
patterns. UBS's hope is that this engine will can offer 
insights in how to best service their high-net-worth clients. 
Perhaps even more interesting is the arrival of 
Wealthfront and Betterment. By automating large parts 
of the wealth management process, they are able to 
offer personalized, tax optimized investments to clients 
who have far less in investable assets than what would 
usually qualify for professional wealth management. 
Wealthfront have an minimum account size of $ 5000 
and Betterment has no minimum account size. Both 
companies' approach is based on asking the user 
questions about their financial goals, financial status 
etc., and from this deduce the optimal asset mix for the 
client using analytics. 
5 
A.I. IN BANKING 
New entrants are using 
automation to cut the costs of 
offering wealth management 
services. 
5. A.I. IN BANKING 

PAGE 21 LABS 
Customer support/help desk 
This isn't really a banking specific area, but as it applies 
to banking I will include it here. Everyone hates being 
“next in line” on some phone call when all they want is 
just to have their online bank work etc. As speech 
processing and natural language processing 
technologies mature, we are closing in on the day 
where computers can handle most customer service 
questions for us. This would mean an end to the waiting 
in line, and happier customers. 
Advanced Analytics 
Another area which has seen a lot of investment are is 
the use of machine intelligence for advanced analytics. 
An example of this is the young company Kensho, which 
just received $ 15 million in funding from Goldman Sachs. 
Kensho has built a natural language search engine 
capable of answering questions like “What happens to 
stocks when inflation falls below 2 % and GDP growth is 
flat” or “Which stocks to buy when the oil price falls”. 
While this does not seem like an application of 
immediate importance for retail banking it's a good 
example of how companies are trying to make 
advanced analytics more user friendly, in essence 
turning business analysts into potential data scientists 
capable of performing sophisticated querying against 
available datasets. This is the explicit goal of Sensai, 
another machine intelligence startup. They offer a 
platform that will make it easier to collate data from 
different sources. As Banking is one of the worlds most 
data-intensive industries, and becoming ever more so, 
the capability to actually analyze all this data will be of 
growing importance. 
A new generation of intelligent 
analytics companies address 
infrastructure concerns raised by 
the arrival of Big Data. 

LABS PAGE 22 
Fraud Detection 
Most industries operating on the world wide web are 
susceptible to fraudulent users, and banking is no 
exception. As technological infrastructure grows more 
complex, so do the demands on those protecting 
companies and people from fraud. Marc Goodman, 
author of “Future Crimes” explains in his book that 
criminals are often the first to exploit emergent 
technologies and turn their complexity against their 
users. This has led to an arms race between online 
security providers and fraudsters involved in everything 
from email scams to credit card fraud. As security 
providers improve, the criminals change their ways. This 
moving target calls for platforms that can learn to 
identify changing patterns of fraud, which is what 
companies like Feedzai and SiftScience is trying to do. By 
tracking thousands of signals in real time and sharing 
information across their network of clients they are able 
to help their customers catch over 89 % of fraud cases 
while reviewing only 1 % of customer orders. While 
SiftScience doesn't seem to have any banking clients at 
the moment, this way of thinking and doing fraud 
detection is bound to spread to banks very soon. 
Underwriting 
The newcomers in the underwriting business, like Zest 
Finance, really cut to the heart of the business of 
banking. Using as much data as they can get their 
hands on, in combination with advanced machine 
learning algorithms, they are able to more effectively 
price personal credit risk. Their business model is based 
on helping lenders in different credit segments by 
assessing their clients for them, and according to them 
their Big Data model is a 40 % improvement over the 
best-in-class industry score. One of Zest finance's 
philosophies is “All data is credit data”. That means that 
they track everything they legally can about the user, to 
identify what interest rate he should pay. This includes, 
browser type, device, location, time, how long you 
Feedzai and SiftScience are 
helping their customers catch 
over 89 % of fraud cases while 
reviewing only 1 % of customer 
orders. 
5. A.I. IN BANKING 

PAGE 23 LABS 
spend reading the conditions of the loan etc. The results 
achieved by Zest Finance and their peers' algorithms 
imply that companies which fail to implement this type 
of thinking in their organization will eventually be faced 
with a massive competitive disadvantage. 
Steps forward 
Banks in general are under threat by fintechs. A big 
reason for this is the extent to which tech-startups 
embrace the emerging AI technologies and leverage 
them to outperform banks at their own game. The good 
news for banks is that none of what these fintech 
companies do is magic, it is simply new technology, 
most of which can be bought, and some of it is even 
free. By building internal competencies in the field of 
data science and machine learning, banks can adopt 
the same AI tools currently used by fintechs. Take for 
example the wealth management companies like 
Wealthfront and Betterment. Building a solution like that 
for a Norwegian bank is more than doable. But that 
takes commitment from a high level in the organization, 
and a realization that properly understanding the data 
you have is growing in importance every single day. 
Over 2500 startups have Artificial 
Intelligence as a core part of their 
business model. 

LABS PAGE 24 

PAGE 25 LABS 
Labs is conducting research and experiments to 
explore the future of financial services 
Labs 
First home buying 
for Millennials 
Buying a home is the first major financial 
event for the Millennials. Banks need to 
recognize and alleviate the uncertainty 
experienced by Millennials when 
designing digital services. 
Engaging the 
Millennials 
Millennials are not engaged with banks. 
This paper brings insights to how banks 
can engage with this generation by 
exploring their mindset, lifestyle and 
needs. 
Big Data 
in banking 
Norwegian banks are not using their 
data to optimize their decision making 
process and improve their business. This 
research explores the value of Big Data 
in banking. 
Small Business 
Banking 
Small businesses are not often prioritised by 
banks, even though they account for a 
large part of the GDP in the Nordics. How 
can banks create solutions that bring value 
for both small businesses and banks? 
The New Wave of 
Artificial Intelligence 
Artificial Intelligence is becoming 
increasingly prevalent in our everyday lives. 
This paper investigates the possible 
implications of the rise of Artificial 
Intelligence in the banking industry. 
Blockchain: Powering 
the Internet of Value 
Blockchain is poised to become a massive 
disruptor for the financial world. This paper 
describes the technology, how it will alter 
the financial world, and a recommended 
strategy for financial institutions. 
evry.com/innovationlab 
thomas.hafsad@evry.com 
Labs research papers 

We bring information to life 

